# Hill Dwarf

Your dwarf character has an assortment of inborn abilities, part and
parcel of dwarven nature.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Constitution score increases by 2.

**Age.** Dwarves mature at the same rate as humans, but they're
considered young until they reach the age of 50. On average, they live
about 350 years.

**Alignment.** Most dwarves are lawful, believing firmly in the benefits
of a well-ordered society. They tend toward good as well, with a strong
sense of fair play and a belief that everyone deserves to share in the
benefits of a just order.

**Size.** Dwarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and average about 150
pounds. Your size is Medium.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 25 feet. Your speed is not reduced
by wearing heavy armor.

**Darkvision.** Accustomed to life underground, you have superior vision
in dark and dim conditions. You can see in dim light within 60 feet of
you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light.
You can't discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.

**Dwarven Resilience.** You have advantage on saving throws against
poison, and you have resistance against poison damage.

**Dwarven Combat Training.** You have proficiency with the battleaxe,
handaxe, light hammer, and warhammer.

**Tool Proficiency.** You gain proficiency with the artisan's tools of
your choice: smith's tools, brewer's supplies, or mason's tools.

**Stonecunning.** Whenever you make an Intelligence (History) check
related to the origin of stonework, you are considered proficient in the
History skill and add double your proficiency bonus to the check,
instead of your normal proficiency bonus.

**Languages.** You can speak, read, and write Common and Dwarvish.
Dwarvish is full of hard consonants and guttural sounds, and those
characteristics spill over into whatever other language a dwarf might
speak.

## Hill Dwarf

As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition, and remarkable
resilience.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Wisdom score increases by 1.

**Dwarven Toughness.** Your hit point maximum increases by 1, and it
increases by 1 every time you gain a level.
