# Elf

Your elf character has a variety of natural abilities, the result of
thousands of years of elven refinement.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Dexterity score increases by 2.

**Age.** Although elves reach physical maturity at about the same age as
humans, the elven understanding of adulthood goes beyond physical growth
to encompass worldly experience. An elf typically claims adulthood and
an adult name around the age of 100 and can live to be 750 years old.

**Alignment.** Elves love freedom, variety, and self-expression, so they
lean strongly toward the gentler aspects of chaos. They value and
protect others' freedom as well as their own, and they are more often
good than not.

**Size.** Elves range from under 5 to over 6 feet tall and have slender
builds. Your size is Medium.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 30 feet.

**Darkvision.** Accustomed to twilit forests and the night sky, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You can see in dim light
within 60 feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if
it were dim light. You can't discern color in darkness, only shades of
gray.

**Keen Senses.** You have proficiency in the Perception skill.

**Fey Ancestry.** You have advantage on saving throws against being
[charmed](http://localhost:3333/gameplay-mechanics/conditions#charmed), and magic can't put you to sleep.

**Trance.** Elves don't need to sleep. Instead, they meditate deeply,
remaining semiconscious, for 4 hours a day. (The Common word for such
meditation is "trance.") While meditating, you can dream after a
fashion; such dreams are actually mental exercises that have become
reflexive through years of practice.

After resting in this way, you gain the same benefit that a human does
from 8 hours of sleep.

**Languages.** You can speak, read, and write Common and Elvish. Elvish
is fluid, with subtle intonations and intricate grammar. Elven
literature is rich and varied, and their songs and poems are famous
among other races. Many bards learn their language so they can add
Elvish ballads to their repertoires.

## High Elf

As a high elf, you have a keen mind and a mastery of at least the basics
of magic. In many fantasy gaming worlds, there are two kinds of high
elves. One type is haughty and reclusive, believing themselves to be
superior to non-elves and even other elves. The other type is more
common and more friendly, and often encountered among humans and other
races.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Intelligence score increases by 1.

**Elf Weapon Training.** You have proficiency with the longsword,
shortsword, shortbow, and longbow.

**Cantrip.** You know one cantrip of your choice from the wizard spell
list. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for it.

**Extra Language.** You can speak, read, and write one extra language of
your choice.
