# Halfling

Your halfling character has a number of traits in common with all other
halflings.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Dexterity score increases by 2.

**Age.** A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of 20 and generally
lives into the middle of his or her second century.

**Alignment.** Most halflings are lawful good. As a rule, they are
good-hearted and kind, hate to see others in pain, and have no tolerance
for oppression. They are also very orderly and traditional, leaning
heavily on the support of their community and the comfort of their old
ways.

**Size.** Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh about 40 pounds.
Your size is Small.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 25 feet.

**Lucky.** When you roll a 1 on the d20 for an attack roll, ability
check, or saving throw, you can reroll the die and must use the new
roll.

**Brave.** You have advantage on saving throws against being
`srd:frightened`.

**Halfling Nimbleness.** You can move through the space of any creature
that is of a size larger than yours.

**Languages.** You can speak, read, and write Common and Halfling. The
Halfling language isn't secret, but halflings are loath to share it with
others. They write very little, so they don't have a rich body of
literature. Their oral tradition, however, is very strong. Almost all
halflings speak Common to converse with the people in whose lands they
dwell or through which they are traveling.

## Lightfoot

As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from notice, even using
other people as cover. You're inclined to be affable and get along well
with others.

Lightfoots are more prone to wanderlust than other halflings, and often
dwell alongside other races or take up a nomadic life.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Charisma score increases by 1.

**Naturally Stealthy.** You can attempt to hide even when you are
obscured only by a creature that is at least one size larger than you.
