The description of each race includes racial traits that are common to
members of that race. The following entries appear among the traits of
most races.

Ability Score Increase
======================

Every race increases one or more of a character's ability scores.

Age
===

The age entry notes the age when a member of the race is considered an
adult, as well as the race's expected lifespan. This information can
help you decide how old your character is at the start of the game. You
can choose any age for your character, which could provide an
explanation for some of your ability scores. For example, if you play a
young or very old character, your age could explain a particularly low
Strength or Constitution score, while advanced age could account for a
high Intelligence or Wisdom.

Alignment
=========

Most races have tendencies toward certain alignments, described in this
entry. These are not binding for player characters, but considering why
your dwarf is chaotic, for example, in defiance of lawful dwarf society
can help you better define your character.

Size
====

Characters of most races are Medium, a size category including creatures
that are roughly 4 to 8 feet tall. Members of a few races are Small
(between 2 and 4 feet tall), which means that certain rules of the game
affect them differently. The most important of these rules is that Small
characters have trouble wielding heavy weapons, as explained in
"Equipment."

Speed
=====

Your speed determines how far you can move when traveling (
"Adventuring") and fighting ("Combat").

Languages
=========

By virtue of your race, your character can speak, read, and write
certain languages.

**One subrace to rule them all?**

Only one subrace per race was included in the [5e
SRD](http://media.wizards.com/2016/downloads/DND/SRD-OGL_V5.1.pdf). We
are hoping to expand using homebrew or third-party content.

If you know of high-quality content that would be a good fit, please
[contact us](mailto:gm@5esrd.com) or [submit it on
github](https://github.com/eepMoody/open5e).

Subraces
========

Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace have the traits of the
parent race in addition to the traits specified for their subrace.
Relationships among subraces vary significantly from race to race and
world to world.

dwarf elf gnome halfling human \* midgard\_heroes/index
southlandsheroes\_races/index
