Actions in Combat
=================

When you take your action on your turn, you can take one of the actions
presented here, an action you gained from your class or a special
feature, or an action that you improvise. Many monsters have action
options of their own in their stat blocks.

When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere in the rules, the GM
tells you whether that action is possible and what kind of roll you need
to make, if any, to determine success or failure.

Types of Actions
----------------

### Attack

The most common action to take in combat is the Attack action, whether
you are swinging a sword, firing an arrow from a bow, or brawling with
your fists.

With this action, you make one melee or ranged attack. See the "Making
an Attack" section for the rules that govern attacks.

Certain features, such as the Extra Attack feature of the fighter, allow
you to make more than one attack with this action.

### Cast a Spell

Spellcasters such as wizards and clerics, as well as many monsters, have
access to spells and can use them to great effect in combat. Each spell
has a casting time, which specifies whether the caster must use an
action, a reaction, minutes, or even hours to cast the spell. Casting a
spell is, therefore, not necessarily an action. Most spells do have a
casting time of 1 action, so a spellcaster often uses his or her action
in combat to cast such a spell.

### Dash

When you take the Dash action, you gain extra movement for the current
turn. The increase equals your speed, after applying any modifiers. With
a speed of 30 feet, for example, you can move up to 60 feet on your turn
if you dash.

Any increase or decrease to your speed changes this additional movement
by the same amount. If your speed of 30 feet is reduced to 15 feet, for
instance, you can move up to 30 feet this turn if you dash.

### Disengage

If you take the Disengage action, your movement doesn't provoke
opportunity attacks for the rest of the turn.

### Dodge

When you take the Dodge action, you focus entirely on avoiding attacks.
Until the start of your next turn, any attack roll made against you has
disadvantage if you can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity saving
throws with advantage. You lose this benefit if you are
srd:incapacitated or if your speed drops to 0.

### Help

You can lend your aid to another creature in the completion of a task.
When you take the Help action, the creature you aid gains advantage on
the next ability check it makes to perform the task you are helping
with, provided that it makes the check before the start of your next
turn.

Alternatively, you can aid a friendly creature in attacking a creature
within 5 feet of you. You feint, distract the target, or in some other
way team up to make your ally's attack more effective. If your ally
attacks the target before your next turn, the first attack roll is made
with advantage.

### Hide

When you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity (Stealth) check in
an attempt to hide, following the rules for hiding. If you succeed, you
gain certain benefits, as described in srd:unseen-attackers-and-targets.

### Ready

Sometimes you want to get the jump on a foe or wait for a particular
circumstance before you act. To do so, you can take the Ready action on
your turn, which lets you act using your reaction before the start of
your next turn.

First, you decide what perceivable circumstance will trigger your
reaction. Then, you choose the action you will take in response to that
trigger, or you choose to move up to your speed in response to it.
Examples include "If the cultist steps on the trapdoor, I'll pull the
lever that opens it," and "If the goblin steps next to me, I move away."

When the trigger occurs, you can either take your reaction right after
the trigger finishes or ignore the trigger. Remember that you can take
only one reaction per round.

When you ready a spell, you cast it as normal but hold its energy, which
you release with your reaction when the trigger occurs. To be readied, a
spell must have a casting time of 1 action, and

holding onto the spell's magic requires concentration. If your
concentration is broken, the spell dissipates without taking effect. For
example, if you are concentrating on the srd:web spell and ready
srd:magic-missile, your srd:web spell ends, and if you take damage
before you release srd:magic-missile with your reaction, your
concentration might be broken.

### Search

When you take the Search action, you devote your attention to finding
something. Depending on the nature of your search, the GM might have you
make a Wisdom (Perception) check or an Intelligence (Investigation)
check.

### Use an Object

You normally interact with an object while doing something else, such as
when you draw a sword as part of an attack. When an object requires your
action for its use, you take the Use an Object action. This action is
also useful when you want to interact with more than one object on your
turn.
