Damage and Healing
==================

Injury and the risk of death are constant companions of those who
explore fantasy gaming worlds. The thrust of a sword, a well-placed
arrow, or a blast of flame from a srd:fireball spell all have the
potential to damage, or even kill, the hardiest of creatures.

Hit Points
----------

Hit points represent a combination of physical and mental durability,
the will to live, and luck. Creatures with more hit points are more
difficult to kill. Those with fewer hit points are more fragile.

A creature's current hit points (usually just called hit points) can be
any number from the creature's hit point maximum down to 0. This number
changes frequently as a creature takes damage or receives healing.

Whenever a creature takes damage, that damage is subtracted from its hit
points. The loss of hit points has no effect on a creature's
capabilities until the creature drops to 0 hit points.

Damage Rolls
------------

Each weapon, spell, and harmful monster ability specifies the damage it
deals. You roll the damage die or dice, add any modifiers, and apply the
damage to your target. Magic weapons, special abilities, and other
factors can grant a bonus to damage. With a penalty, it is possible to
deal 0 damage, but never negative damage. When attacking with a
**weapon**, you add your ability modifier---the same modifier used for
the attack roll---to the damage. A **spell** tells you which dice to
roll for damage and whether to add any modifiers.

If a spell or other effect deals damage to **more** **than one target**
at the same time, roll the damage once for all of them. For example,
when a wizard casts srd:fireball or a cleric casts srd:flame-strike, the
spell's damage is rolled once for all creatures caught in the blast.

### Critical Hits

When you score a critical hit, you get to roll extra dice for the
attack's damage against the target. Roll all of the attack's damage dice
twice and add them together. Then add any relevant modifiers as normal.
To speed up play, you can roll all the damage dice at once.

For example, if you score a critical hit with a dagger, roll 2d4 for the
damage, rather than 1d4, and then add your relevant ability modifier. If
the attack involves other damage dice, such as from the rogue's Sneak
Attack feature, you roll those dice twice as well.

### Damage Types

Different attacks, damaging spells, and other harmful effects deal
different types of damage. Damage types have no rules of their own, but
other rules, such as damage resistance, rely on the types.

The damage types follow, with examples to help a GM assign a damage type
to a new effect.

**Acid.** The corrosive spray of a black dragon's breath and the
dissolving enzymes secreted by a black pudding deal acid damage.

**Bludgeoning.** Blunt force attacks---hammers, falling, constriction,
and the like---deal bludgeoning damage.

**Cold.** The infernal chill radiating from an ice devil's spear and the
frigid blast of a white dragon's breath deal cold damage.

**Fire.** Red dragons breathe fire, and many spells conjure flames to
deal fire damage.

**Force.** Force is pure magical energy focused into a damaging form.
Most effects that deal force damage are spells, including *magic
missile* and *spiritual weapon*.

**Lightning.** A *lightning bolt* spell and a blue dragon's breath deal
lightning damage.

**Necrotic.** Necrotic damage, dealt by certain undead and a spell such
as *chill touch*, withers matter and even the soul.

**Piercing.** Puncturing and impaling attacks, including spears and
monsters' bites, deal piercing damage.

**Poison.** Venomous stings and the toxic gas of a green dragon's breath
deal poison damage.

**Psychic.** Mental abilities such as a mind flayer's psionic blast deal
psychic damage.

**Radiant.** Radiant damage, dealt by a cleric's *flame strike* spell or
an angel's smiting weapon, sears the flesh like fire and overloads the
spirit with power.

**Slashing.** Swords, axes, and monsters' claws deal slashing damage.

**Thunder.** A concussive burst of sound, such as the effect of the
srd:thunderwave spell, deals thunder damage.

Damage Resistance and Vulnerability
-----------------------------------

Some creatures and objects are exceedingly difficult or unusually easy
to hurt with certain types of damage.

If a creature or an object has **resistance** to a damage type, damage
of that type is halved against it. If a creature or an object has
**vulnerability** to a damage type, damage of that type is doubled
against it.

Resistance and then vulnerability are applied after all other modifiers
to damage. For example, a creature has resistance to bludgeoning damage
and is hit by an attack that deals 25 bludgeoning damage. The creature
is also within a magical aura that reduces all damage by 5. The 25
damage is first reduced by 5 and then halved, so the creature takes 10
damage.

Multiple instances of resistance or vulnerability that affect the same
damage type count as only one instance. For example, if a creature has
resistance to fire damage as well as resistance to all nonmagical
damage, the damage of a nonmagical fire is reduced by half against the
creature, not reduced by three--- quarters.

Healing
-------

Unless it results in death, damage isn't permanent. Even death is
reversible through powerful magic. Rest can restore a creature's hit
points, and magical methods such as a *cure wounds* spell or a *potion
of healing* can remove damage in an instant.

When a creature receives healing of any kind, hit points regained are
added to its current hit points. A creature's hit points can't exceed
its hit point maximum, so any hit points regained in excess of this
number are lost. For example, a druid grants a ranger 8 hit points of
healing. If the ranger has 14 current hit points and has a hit point
maximum of 20, the ranger regains 6 hit points from the druid, not 8.

A creature that has died can't regain hit points until magic such as the
srd:revivify spell has restored it to life.

Dropping to 0 Hit Points
------------------------

When you drop to 0 hit points, you either die outright or fall
srd:unconscious, as explained in the following sections.

### Instant Death

Massive damage can kill you instantly. When damage reduces you to 0 hit
points and there is damage remaining, you die if the remaining damage
equals or exceeds your hit point maximum.

For example, a cleric with a maximum of 12 hit points currently has 6
hit points. If she takes 18 damage from an attack, she is reduced to 0
hit points, but 12 damage remains. Because the remaining damage equals
her hit point maximum, the cleric dies.

### Falling Unconscious

If damage reduces you to 0 hit points and fails to kill you, you fall
srd:unconscious. This unconsciousness ends if you regain any hit points.

### Death Saving Throws

Whenever you start your turn with 0 hit points, you must make a special
saving throw, called a death saving throw, to determine whether you
creep closer to death or hang onto life. Unlike other saving throws,
this one isn't tied to any ability score. You are in the hands of fate
now, aided only by spells and features that improve your chances of
succeeding on a saving throw.

Roll a d20. If the roll is 10 or higher, you succeed. Otherwise, you
fail. A success or failure has no effect by itself. On your third
success, you become stable (see below). On your third failure, you die.
The successes and failures don't need to be consecutive; keep track of
both until you collect three of a kind. The number of both is reset to
zero when you regain any hit points or become stable.

**Rolling 1 or 20.** When you make a death saving throw and roll a 1 on
the d20, it counts as two failures. If you roll a 20 on the d20, you
regain 1 hit point.

**Damage at 0 Hit Points.** If you take any damage while you have 0 hit
points, you suffer a death saving throw failure. If the damage is from a
critical hit, you suffer two failures instead. If the damage equals or
exceeds your hit point maximum, you suffer instant death.

### Stabilizing a Creature

The best way to save a creature with 0 hit points is to heal it. If
healing is unavailable, the creature can at least be stabilized so that
it isn't killed by a failed death saving throw.

You can use your action to administer first aid to an srd:unconscious
creature and attempt to stabilize it, which requires a successful DC 10
Wisdom (Medicine) check. A **stable** creature doesn't make death saving
throws, even though it has 0 hit points, but it does remain
srd:unconscious. The creature stops being stable, and must start making
death saving throws again, if it takes any damage. A stable creature
that isn't healed regains 1 hit point after 1d4 hours.

### Monsters and Death

Most GMs have a monster die the instant it drops to 0 hit points, rather
than having it fall srd:unconscious and make death saving throws. Mighty
villains and special nonplayer characters are common exceptions; the GM
might have them fall srd:unconscious and follow the same rules as player
characters.

Knocking a Creature Out
-----------------------

Sometimes an attacker wants to incapacitate a foe, rather than deal a
killing blow. When an attacker reduces a creature to 0 hit points with a
melee attack, the attacker can knock the creature out. The attacker can
make this choice the instant the damage is dealt. The creature falls
srd:unconscious and is stable.

Temporary Hit Points
--------------------

Some spells and special abilities confer temporary hit points to a
creature. Temporary hit points aren't actual hit points; they are a
buffer against damage, a pool of hit points that protect you from
injury. When you have temporary hit points and take damage, the
temporary hit points are lost first, and any leftover damage carries
over to your normal hit points. *For example, if you have 5 temporary
hit points and take 7 damage, you lose the temporary hit points and then
take 2 damage.* Because temporary hit points are separate from your
actual hit points, they can exceed your hit point maximum. A character
can, therefore, be at full hit points and receive temporary hit points.

Healing can't restore temporary hit points, and they can't be added
together. If you have temporary hit points and receive more of them, you
decide whether to keep the ones you have or to gain the new ones. For
example, if a spell grants you 12 temporary hit points when you already
have 10, you can have 12 or 10, not 22.

If you have 0 hit points, receiving temporary hit points doesn't restore
you to consciousness or stabilize you. They can still absorb damage
directed at you while you're in that state, but only true healing can
save you.

Unless a feature that grants you temporary hit points has a duration,
they last until they're depleted or you finish a long rest.
