# Ability

Six abilities provide a quick description of every creature's physical
and mental characteristics:

-   **Strength**, measuring physical power
-   **Dexterity**, measuring agility
-   **Constitution**, measuring endurance
-   **Intelligence**, measuring reasoning and memory
-   **Wisdom**, measuring perception and insight
-   **Charisma**, measuring force of personality

Is a character muscle-bound and insightful? Brilliant and charming?
Nimble and hardy? Ability scores define these qualities---a creature's
assets as well as weaknesses.

The three main rolls of the game---the ability check, the saving throw,
and the attack roll---rely on the six ability scores. The book's
introduction describes the basic rule behind these rolls: roll a d20,
add an ability modifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and
compare the total to a target number.

## Ability Scores and Modifiers

Each of a creature's abilities has a score, a number that defines the
magnitude of that ability. An ability score is not just a measure of
innate capabilities, but also encompasses a creature's training and
competence in activities related to that ability.

A score of 10 or 11 is the normal human average, but adventurers and
many monsters are a cut above average in most abilities. A score of 18
is the highest that a person usually reaches. Adventurers can have
scores as high as 20, and monsters and divine beings can have scores as
high as 30.

Each ability also has a modifier, derived from the score and ranging
from −5 (for an ability score of 1) to +10 (for a score of 30). The
Ability Scores and Modifiers table notes the ability modifiers for the
range of possible ability scores, from 1 to 30.

<table style="width:47%;">
<caption>Ability Scores and Modifiers</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Score</th>
<th>Modifier</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1</td>
<td>−5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>2-3</td>
<td>−4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>4-5</td>
<td>−3</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>6-7</td>
<td>−2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>8-9</td>
<td>−1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>10-11</td>
<td>+0</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>12-13</td>
<td>+1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>14-15</td>
<td>+2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>16-17</td>
<td>+3</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>18-19</td>
<td>+4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>20-21</td>
<td>+5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>22-23</td>
<td>+6</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>24-25</td>
<td>+7</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>26-27</td>
<td>+8</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>28-29</td>
<td>+9</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>30</td>
<td>+10</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

To determine an ability modifier without consulting the table, subtract
10 from the ability score and then divide the total by 2 (round down).

Because ability modifiers affect almost every attack roll, ability
check, and saving throw, ability modifiers come up in play more often
than their associated scores.

## Advantage and Disadvantage

Sometimes a special ability or spell tells you that you have advantage
or disadvantage on an ability check, a saving throw, or an attack roll.
When that happens, you roll a second d20 when you make the roll. Use the
higher of the two rolls if you have advantage, and use the lower roll if
you have disadvantage. For example, if you have disadvantage and roll a
17 and a 5, you use the 5. If you instead have advantage and roll those
numbers, you use the 17.

If multiple situations affect a roll and each one grants advantage or
imposes disadvantage on it, you don't roll more than one additional d20.
If two favorable situations grant advantage, for example, you still roll
only one additional d20.

If circumstances cause a roll to have both advantage and disadvantage,
you are considered to have neither of them, and you roll one d20. This
is true even if multiple circumstances impose disadvantage and only one
grants advantage or vice versa. In such a situation, you have neither
advantage nor disadvantage.

When you have advantage or disadvantage and something in the game, such
as the halfling's Lucky trait, lets you reroll the d20, you can reroll
only one of the dice. You choose which one. For example, if a halfling
has advantage or disadvantage on an ability check and rolls a 1 and a
13, the halfling could use the Lucky trait to reroll the 1.

You usually gain advantage or disadvantage through the use of special
abilities, actions, or spells. Inspiration can also give a character
advantage. The GM can also decide that circumstances influence a roll in
one direction or the other and grant advantage or impose disadvantage as
a result.

## Proficiency Bonus

Characters have a proficiency bonus determined by level. Monsters also
have this bonus, which is incorporated in their stat blocks. The bonus
is used in the rules on ability checks, saving throws, and attack rolls.

Your proficiency bonus can't be added to a single die roll or other
number more than once. For example, if two different rules say you can
add your proficiency bonus to a Wisdom saving throw, you nevertheless
add the bonus only once when you make the save.

Occasionally, your proficiency bonus might be multiplied or divided
(doubled or halved, for example) before you apply it. For example, the
rogue's Expertise feature doubles the proficiency bonus for certain
ability checks. If a circumstance suggests that your proficiency bonus
applies more than once to the same roll, you still add it only once and
multiply or divide it only once.

By the same token, if a feature or effect allows you to multiply your
proficiency bonus when making an ability check that wouldn't normally
benefit from your proficiency bonus, you still don't add the bonus to
the check. For that check your proficiency bonus is 0, given the fact
that multiplying 0 by any number is still 0. For instance, if you lack
proficiency in the History skill, you gain no benefit from a feature
that lets you double your proficiency bonus when you make Intelligence
(History) checks.

In general, you don't multiply your proficiency bonus for attack rolls
or saving throws. If a feature or effect allows you to do so, these same
rules apply.

## Ability Checks

An ability check tests a character's or monster's innate talent and
training in an effort to overcome a challenge. The GM calls for an
ability check when a character or monster attempts an action (other than
an attack) that has a chance of failure. When the outcome is uncertain,
the dice determine the results.

For every ability check, the GM decides which of the six abilities is
relevant to the task at hand and the difficulty of the task, represented
by a Difficulty Class.

The more difficult a task, the higher its DC. The Typical Difficulty
Classes table shows the most common DCs.

<table style="width:35%;">
<caption>Typical Difficulty Classes</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 27%" />
<col style="width: 6%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Task Difficulty</th>
<th>DC</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Very easy</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Easy</td>
<td>10</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Medium</td>
<td>15</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Hard</td>
<td>20</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Very hard</td>
<td>25</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Nearly impossible</td>
<td>30</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

To make an ability check, roll a d20 and add the relevant ability
modifier. As with other d20 rolls, apply bonuses and penalties, and
compare the total to the DC. If the total equals or exceeds the DC, the
ability check is a success---the creature overcomes the challenge at
hand. Otherwise, it's a failure, which means the character or monster
makes no progress toward the objective or makes progress combined with a
setback determined by the GM.

### Contests

Sometimes one character's or monster's efforts are directly opposed to
another's. This can occur when both of them are trying to do the same
thing and only one can succeed, such as attempting to snatch up a magic
ring that has fallen on the floor. This situation also applies when one
of them is trying to prevent the other one from accomplishing a
goal---for example, when a monster tries to force open a door that an
adventurer is holding closed. In situations like these, the outcome is
determined by a special form of ability check, called a contest.

Both participants in a contest make ability checks appropriate to their
efforts. They apply all appropriate bonuses and penalties, but instead
of comparing the total to a DC, they compare the totals of their two
checks. The participant with the higher check total wins the contest.
That character or monster either succeeds at the action or prevents the
other one from succeeding.

If the contest results in a tie, the situation remains the same as it
was before the contest. Thus, one contestant might win the contest by
default. If two characters tie in a contest to snatch a ring off the
floor, neither character grabs it. In a contest between a monster trying
to open a door and an adventurer trying to keep the door closed, a tie
means that the door remains shut.

### Skills

Each ability covers a broad range of capabilities, including skills that
a character or a monster can be proficient in. A skill represents a
specific aspect of an ability score, and an individual's proficiency in
a skill demonstrates a focus on that aspect. (A character's starting
skill proficiencies are determined at character creation, and a
monster's skill proficiencies appear in the monster's stat block.)

For example, a Dexterity check might reflect a character's attempt to
pull off an acrobatic stunt, to palm an object, or to stay hidden. Each
of these aspects of Dexterity has an associated skill: Acrobatics,
Sleight of Hand, and Stealth, respectively. So a character who has
proficiency in the Stealth skill is particularly good at Dexterity
checks related to sneaking and hiding.

The skills related to each ability score are shown in the following
list. (No skills are related to Constitution.) See an ability's
description in the later sections of this section for examples of how to
use a skill associated with an ability.

**Strength** - Athletics

**Dexterity** - Acrobatics - Sleight of Hand - Stealth

**Intelligence** - Arcana - History - Investigation - Nature - Religion

**Wisdom** - Animal Handling - Insight - Medicine - Perception -
Survival

**Charisma** - Deception - Intimidation - Performance - Persuasion

Sometimes, the GM might ask for an ability check using a specific
skill---for example, "Make a Wisdom (Perception) check." At other times,
a player might ask the GM if proficiency in a particular skill applies
to a check. In either case, proficiency in a skill means an individual
can add his or her proficiency bonus to ability checks that involve that
skill. Without proficiency in the skill, the individual makes a normal
ability check.

For example, if a character attempts to climb up a dangerous cliff, the
GM might ask for a Strength (Athletics) check. If the character is
proficient in Athletics, the character's proficiency bonus is added to
the Strength check. If the character lacks that proficiency, he or she
just makes a Strength check.

#### Variant: Skills with Different Abilities

Normally, your proficiency in a skill applies only to a specific kind of
ability check. Proficiency in Athletics, for example, usually applies to
Strength checks. In some situations, though, your proficiency might
reasonably apply to a different kind of check. In such cases, the GM
might ask for a check using an unusual combination of ability and skill,
or you might ask your GM if you can apply a proficiency to a different
check. For example, if you have to swim from an offshore island to the
mainland, your GM might call for a Constitution check to see if you have
the stamina to make it that far. In this case, your GM might allow you
to apply your proficiency in Athletics and ask for a Constitution
(Athletics) check. So if you're proficient in Athletics, you apply your
proficiency bonus to the Constitution check just as you would normally
do for a Strength (Athletics) check. Similarly, when your half-orc
barbarian uses a display of raw strength to intimidate an enemy, your GM
might ask for a Strength (Intimidation) check, even though Intimidation
is normally associated with Charisma.

### Passive Checks

A passive check is a special kind of ability check that doesn't involve
any die rolls. Such a check can represent the average result for a task
done repeatedly, such as searching for secret doors over and over again,
or can be used when the GM wants to secretly determine whether the
characters succeed at something without rolling dice, such as noticing a
hidden monster.

Here's how to determine a character's total for a passive check:

> 10 + all modifiers that normally apply to the check

If the character has advantage on the check, add 5. For disadvantage,
subtract 5. The game refers to a passive check total as a **score**.

For example, if a 1st-level character has a Wisdom of 15 and proficiency
in Perception, he or she has a passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 14.

The rules on hiding in the "Dexterity" section below rely on passive
checks, as do the exploration rules.

### Working Together

Sometimes two or more characters team up to attempt a task. The
character who's leading the effort---or the one with the highest ability
modifier---can make an ability check with advantage, reflecting the help
provided by the other characters. In combat, this requires the Help
action.

A character can only provide help if the task is one that he or she
could attempt alone. For example, trying to open a lock requires
proficiency with thieves' tools, so a character who lacks that
proficiency can't help another character in that task. Moreover, a
character can help only when two or more individuals working together
would actually be productive. Some tasks, such as threading a needle,
are no easier with help.

#### Group Checks

When a number of individuals are trying to accomplish something as a
group, the GM might ask for a group ability check. In such a situation,
the characters who are skilled at a particular task help cover those who
aren't.

To make a group ability check, everyone in the group makes the ability
check. If at least half the group succeeds, the whole group succeeds.
Otherwise, the group fails.

Group checks don't come up very often, and they're most useful when all
the characters succeed or fail as a group. For example, when adventurers
are navigating a swamp, the GM might call for a group Wisdom (Survival)
check to see if the characters can avoid the quicksand, sinkholes, and
other natural hazards of the environment. If at least half the group
succeeds, the successful characters are able to guide their companions
out of danger. Otherwise, the group stumbles into one of these hazards.

## Using Each Ability

Every task that a character or monster might attempt in the game is
covered by one of the six abilities. This section explains in more
detail what those abilities mean and the ways they are used in the game.

### Strength

Strength measures bodily power, athletic training, and the extent to
which you can exert raw physical force.

#### Strength Checks

A Strength check can model any attempt to lift, push, pull, or break
something, to force your body through a space, or to otherwise apply
brute force to a situation. The Athletics skill reflects aptitude in
certain kinds of Strength checks.

##### Athletics

Your Strength (Athletics) check covers difficult situations you
encounter while climbing, jumping, or swimming. Examples include the
following activities:

-   You attempt to climb a sheer or slippery cliff, avoid hazards while
    scaling a wall, or cling to a surface while something is trying to
    knock you off.
-   You try to jump an unusually long distance or pull off a stunt
    midjump.
-   You struggle to swim or stay afloat in treacherous currents,
    storm-tossed waves, or areas of thick seaweed. Or another creature
    tries to push or pull you underwater or otherwise interfere with
    your swimming.

##### Other Strength Checks

The GM might also call for a Strength check when you try to accomplish
tasks like the following:

-   Force open a stuck, locked, or barred door
-   Break free of bonds
-   Push through a tunnel that is too small
-   Hang on to a wagon while being dragged behind it
-   Tip over a statue
-   Keep a boulder from rolling

#### Attack Rolls and Damage

You add your Strength modifier to your attack roll and your damage roll
when attacking with a melee weapon such as a mace, a battleaxe, or a
javelin. You use melee weapons to make melee attacks in hand-to-hand
combat, and some of them can be thrown to make a ranged attack.

#### Lifting and Carrying

Your Strength score determines the amount of weight you can bear. The
following terms define what you can lift or carry.

**Carrying Capacity.** Your carrying capacity is your Strength score
multiplied by 15. This is the weight (in pounds) that you can carry,
which is high enough that most characters don't usually have to worry
about it.

**Push, Drag, or Lift.** You can push, drag, or lift a weight in pounds
up to twice your carrying capacity (or 30 times your Strength score).
While pushing or dragging weight in excess of your carrying capacity,
your speed drops to 5 feet.

**Size and Strength.** Larger creatures can bear more weight, whereas
Tiny creatures can carry less. For each size category above Medium,
double the creature's carrying capacity and the amount it can push,
drag, or lift. For a Tiny creature, halve these weights.

#### Variant: Encumbrance

The rules for lifting and carrying are intentionally simple. Here is a
variant if you are looking for more detailed rules for determining how a
character is hindered by the weight of equipment. When you use this
variant, ignore the Strength column of the Armor table.

If you carry weight in excess of 5 times your Strength score, you are
**encumbered**, which means your speed drops by 10 feet.

If you carry weight in excess of 10 times your Strength score, up to
your maximum carrying capacity, you are instead **heavily encumbered**,
which means your speed drops by 20 feet and you have disadvantage on
ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws that use Strength,
Dexterity, or Constitution.

### Dexterity

Dexterity measures agility, reflexes, and balance.

#### Dexterity Checks

A Dexterity check can model any attempt to move nimbly, quickly, or
quietly, or to keep from falling on tricky footing. The Acrobatics,
Sleight of Hand, and Stealth skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of
Dexterity checks.

##### Acrobatics

Your Dexterity (Acrobatics) check covers your attempt to stay on your
feet in a tricky situation, such as when you're trying to run across a
sheet of ice, balance on a tightrope, or stay upright on a rocking
ship's deck. The GM might also call for a Dexterity (Acrobatics) check
to see if you can perform acrobatic stunts, including dives, rolls,
somersaults, and flips.

##### Sleight of Hand

Whenever you attempt an act of legerdemain or manual trickery, such as
planting something on someone else or concealing an object on your
person, make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. The GM might also call
for a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check to determine whether you can
lift a coin purse off another person or slip something out of another
person's pocket.

##### Stealth

Make a Dexterity (Stealth) check when you attempt to conceal yourself
from enemies, slink past guards, slip away without being noticed, or
sneak up on someone without being seen or heard.

##### Other Dexterity Checks

The GM might call for a Dexterity check when you try to accomplish tasks
like the following:

-   Control a heavily laden cart on a steep descent
-   Steer a chariot around a tight turn
-   Pick a lock
-   Disable a trap
-   Securely tie up a prisoner
-   Wriggle free of bonds
-   Play a stringed instrument
-   Craft a small or detailed object

**Hiding**

The GM decides when circumstances are appropriate for hiding. When you
try to hide, make a Dexterity (Stealth) check. Until you are discovered
or you stop hiding, that check's total is contested by the Wisdom
(Perception) check of any creature that actively searches for signs of
your presence.

You can't hide from a creature that can see you clearly, and you give
away your position if you make noise, such as shouting a warning or
knocking over a vase.

An invisible creature can always try to hide. Signs of its passage might
still be noticed, and it does have to stay quiet.

In combat, most creatures stay alert for signs of danger all around, so
if you come out of hiding and approach a creature, it usually sees you.
However, under certain circumstances, the GM might allow you to stay
hidden as you approach a creature that is distracted, allowing you to
gain advantage on an attack roll before you are seen.

**Passive Perception.** When you hide, there's a chance someone will
notice you even if they aren't searching. To determine whether such a
creature notices you, the GM compares your Dexterity (Stealth) check
with that creature's passive Wisdom (Perception) score, which equals 10
+ the creature's Wisdom modifier, as well as any other bonuses or
penalties. If the creature has advantage, add 5. For disadvantage,
subtract 5. For example, if a 1st-level character (with a proficiency
bonus of +2) has a Wisdom of 15 (a +2 modifier) and proficiency in
Perception, he or she has a passive Wisdom (Perception) of 14.

**What Can You See?** One of the main factors in determining whether you
can find a hidden creature or object is how well you can see in an area,
which might be **lightly** or **heavily obscured**, as explained in
`srd:the-environment`.

#### Attack Rolls and Damage

You add your Dexterity modifier to your attack roll and your damage roll
when attacking with a ranged weapon, such as a sling or a longbow. You
can also add your Dexterity modifier to your attack roll and your damage
roll when attacking with a melee weapon that has the finesse property,
such as a dagger or a rapier.

#### Armor Class

Depending on the armor you wear, you might add some or all of your
Dexterity modifier to your Armor Class.

#### Initiative

At the beginning of every combat, you roll initiative by making a
Dexterity check. Initiative determines the order of creatures' turns in
combat.

### Constitution

Constitution measures health, stamina, and vital force.

#### Constitution Checks

Constitution checks are uncommon, and no skills apply to Constitution
checks, because the endurance this ability represents is largely passive
rather than involving a specific effort on the part of a character or
monster. A Constitution check can model your attempt to push beyond
normal limits, however.

The GM might call for a Constitution check when you try to accomplish
tasks like the following:

-   Hold your breath
-   March or labor for hours without rest
-   Go without sleep
-   Survive without food or water
-   Quaff an entire stein of ale in one go

#### Hit Points

Your Constitution modifier contributes to your hit points. Typically,
you add your Constitution modifier to each Hit Die you roll for your hit
points.

If your Constitution modifier changes, your hit point maximum changes as
well, as though you had the new modifier from 1st level. For example, if
you raise your Constitution score when you reach 4th level and your
Constitution modifier increases from +1 to +2, you adjust your hit point
maximum as though the modifier had always been +2. So you add 3 hit
points for your first three levels, and then roll your hit points for
4th level using your new modifier. Or if you're 7th level and some
effect lowers your Constitution score so as to reduce your Constitution
modifier by 1, your hit point maximum is reduced by 7.

### Intelligence

Intelligence measures mental acuity, accuracy of recall, and the ability
to reason.

#### Intelligence Checks

An Intelligence check comes into play when you need to draw on logic,
education, memory, or deductive reasoning. The Arcana, History,
Investigation, Nature, and Religion skills reflect aptitude in certain
kinds of Intelligence checks.

##### Arcana

Your Intelligence (Arcana) check measures your ability to recall lore
about spells, magic items, eldritch symbols, magical traditions, the
planes of existence, and the inhabitants of those planes.

##### History

Your Intelligence (History) check measures your ability to recall lore
about historical events, legendary people, ancient kingdoms, past
disputes, recent wars, and lost civilizations.

##### Investigation

When you look around for clues and make deductions based on those clues,
you make an Intelligence (Investigation) check. You might deduce the
location of a hidden object, discern from the appearance of a wound what
kind of weapon dealt it, or determine the weakest point in a tunnel that
could cause it to collapse. Poring through ancient scrolls in search of
a hidden fragment of knowledge might also call for an Intelligence
(Investigation) check.

##### Nature

Your Intelligence (Nature) check measures your ability to recall lore
about terrain, plants and animals, the weather, and natural cycles.

##### Religion

Your Intelligence (Religion) check

measures your ability to recall lore about deities, rites and prayers,
religious hierarchies, holy symbols, and the practices of secret cults.

##### Other Intelligence Checks

The GM might call for an Intelligence check when you try to accomplish
tasks like the following:

-   Communicate with a creature without using words
-   Estimate the value of a precious item
-   Pull together a disguise to pass as a city guard
-   Forge a document
-   Recall lore about a craft or trade
-   Win a game of skill

#### Spellcasting Ability

Wizards use Intelligence as their spellcasting ability, which helps
determine the saving throw DCs of spells they cast.

### Wisdom

Wisdom reflects how attuned you are to the world around you and
represents perceptiveness and intuition.

#### Wisdom Checks

A Wisdom check might reflect an effort to read body language, understand
someone's feelings, notice things about the environment, or care for an
injured person. The Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Perception, and
Survival skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of Wisdom checks.

##### Animal Handling

When there is any question whether you can calm down a domesticated
animal, keep a mount from getting spooked, or intuit an animal's
intentions, the GM might call for a Wisdom (Animal Handling) check. You
also make a Wisdom (Animal Handling) check to control your mount when
you attempt a risky maneuver.

##### Insight

Your Wisdom (Insight) check decides whether you can determine the true
intentions of a creature, such as when searching out a lie or predicting
someone's next move. Doing so involves gleaning clues from body
language, speech habits, and changes in mannerisms.

##### Medicine

A Wisdom (Medicine) check lets you try to stabilize a dying companion or
diagnose an illness.

##### Perception

Your Wisdom (Perception) check lets you spot, hear, or otherwise detect
the presence of something. It measures your general awareness of your
surroundings and the keenness of your senses. For example, you might try
to hear a conversation through a closed door, eavesdrop under an open
window, or hear monsters moving stealthily in the forest. Or you might
try to spot things that are obscured or easy to miss, whether they are
orcs lying in ambush on a road, thugs hiding in the shadows of an alley,
or candlelight under a closed secret door.

##### Survival

The GM might ask you to make a Wisdom (Survival) check to follow tracks,
hunt wild game, guide your group through frozen wastelands, identify
signs that owlbears live nearby, predict the weather, or avoid quicksand
and other natural hazards.

##### Other Wisdom Checks

The GM might call for a Wisdom check when you try to accomplish tasks
like the following:

-   Get a gut feeling about what course of action to follow
-   Discern whether a seemingly dead or living creature is undead

#### Spellcasting Ability

Clerics, druids, and rangers use Wisdom as their spellcasting ability,
which helps determine the saving throw DCs of spells they cast.

### Charisma

Charisma measures your ability to interact effectively with others. It
includes such factors as confidence and eloquence, and it can represent
a charming or commanding personality.

#### Charisma Checks

A Charisma check might arise when you try to influence or entertain
others, when you try to make an impression or tell a convincing lie, or
when you are navigating a tricky social situation. The Deception,
Intimidation, Performance, and Persuasion skills reflect aptitude in
certain kinds of Charisma checks.

##### Deception

Your Charisma (Deception) check determines whether you can convincingly
hide the truth, either verbally or through your actions. This deception
can encompass everything from misleading others through ambiguity to
telling outright lies. Typical situations include trying to fast-talk a
guard, con a merchant, earn money through gambling, pass yourself off in
a disguise, dull someone's suspicions with false assurances, or maintain
a straight face while telling a blatant lie.

##### Intimidation

When you attempt to influence someone through overt threats, hostile
actions, and physical violence, the GM might ask you to make a Charisma
(Intimidation) check. Examples include trying to pry information out of
a prisoner, convincing street thugs to back down from a confrontation,
or using the edge of a broken bottle to convince a sneering vizier to
reconsider a decision.

##### Performance

Your Charisma (Performance) check determines how well you can delight an
audience with music, dance, acting, storytelling, or some other form of
entertainment.

##### Persuasion

When you attempt to influence someone or a group of people with tact,
social graces, or good nature, the GM might ask you to make a Charisma
(Persuasion) check. Typically, you use persuasion when acting in good
faith, to foster friendships, make cordial requests, or exhibit proper
etiquette. Examples of persuading others include convincing a
chamberlain to let your party see the king, negotiating peace between
warring tribes, or inspiring a crowd of townsfolk.

##### Other Charisma Checks

The GM might call for a Charisma check when you try to accomplish tasks
like the following:

-   Find the best person to talk to for news, rumors, and gossip
-   Blend into a crowd to get the sense of key topics of conversation

#### Spellcasting Ability

Bards, paladins, sorcerers, and warlocks use Charisma as their
spellcasting ability, which helps determine the saving throw DCs of
spells they cast.
