# Between Adventures

Between trips to dungeons and battles against ancient evils, adventurers
need time to rest, recuperate, and prepare for their next adventure.
Many adventurers also use this time to perform other tasks, such as
crafting arms and armor, performing research, or spending their
hard-earned gold.

In some cases, the passage of time is something that occurs with little
fanfare or description. When starting a new adventure, the GM might
simply declare that a certain amount of time has passed and allow you to
describe in general terms what your character has been doing. At other
times, the GM might want to keep track of just how much time is passing
as events beyond your perception stay in motion.

## Lifestyle Expenses

Between adventures, you choose a particular quality of life and pay the
cost of maintaining that lifestyle.

Living a particular lifestyle doesn't have a huge effect on your
character, but your lifestyle can affect the way other individuals and
groups react to you. For example, when you lead an aristocratic
lifestyle, it might be easier for you to influence the nobles of the
city than if you live in poverty.

## Downtime Activities

Between adventures, the GM might ask you what your character is doing
during his or her downtime. Periods of downtime can vary in duration,
but each downtime activity requires a certain number of days to complete
before you gain any benefit, and at least 8 hours of each day must be
spent on the downtime activity for the day to count. The days do not
need to be consecutive. If you have more than the minimum amount of days
to spend, you can keep doing the same thing for a longer period of time,
or switch to a new downtime activity.

Downtime activities other than the ones presented below are possible. If
you want your character to spend his or her downtime performing an
activity not covered here, discuss it with your GM.

### Crafting

You can craft nonmagical objects, including adventuring equipment and
works of art. You must be proficient with tools related to the object
you are trying to create (typically artisan's tools). You might also
need access to special materials or locations necessary to create it.
For example, someone proficient with smith's tools needs a forge in
order to craft a sword or suit of armor.

For every day of downtime you spend crafting, you can craft one or more
items with a total market value not exceeding 5 gp, and you must expend
raw materials worth half the total market value. If something you want
to craft has a market value greater than 5 gp, you make progress every
day in 5- gp increments until you reach the market value of the item.
For example, a suit of plate armor (market value 1,500 gp) takes 300
days to craft by yourself.

Multiple characters can combine their efforts toward the crafting of a
single item, provided that the characters all have proficiency with the
requisite tools and are working together in the same place. Each
character contributes 5 gp worth of effort for every day spent helping
to craft the item. For example, three characters with the requisite tool
proficiency and the proper facilities can craft a suit of plate armor in
100 days, at a total cost of 750 gp.

While crafting, you can maintain a modest lifestyle without having to
pay 1 gp per day, or a comfortable lifestyle at half the normal cost.

### Practicing a Profession

You can work between adventures, allowing you to maintain a modest
lifestyle without having to pay 1 gp per day. This benefit lasts as long
you continue to practice your profession.

If you are a member of an organization that can provide gainful
employment, such as a temple or a thieves' guild, you earn enough to
support a comfortable lifestyle instead.

If you have proficiency in the Performance skill and put your
performance skill to use during your downtime, you earn enough to
support a wealthy lifestyle instead.

### Recuperating

You can use downtime between adventures to recover from a debilitating
injury, disease, or poison.

After three days of downtime spent recuperating, you can make a DC 15
Constitution saving throw. On a successful save, you can choose one of
the following results:

-   End one effect on you that prevents you from regaining hit points.
-   For the next 24 hours, gain advantage on saving throws against one
    disease or poison currently affecting you.

### Researching

The time between adventures is a great chance to perform research,
gaining insight into mysteries that have unfurled over the course of the
campaign. Research can include poring over dusty tomes and crumbling
scrolls in a library or buying drinks for the locals to pry rumors and
gossip from their lips.

When you begin your research, the GM determines whether the information
is available, how many days of downtime it will take to find it, and
whether there are any restrictions on your research (such as needing to
seek out a specific individual, tome, or location). The GM might also
require you to make one or more ability checks, such as an Intelligence
(Investigation) check to find clues pointing toward the information you
seek, or a Charisma (Persuasion) check to secure someone's aid. Once
those conditions are met, you learn the information if it is available.

For each day of research, you must spend 1 gp to cover your expenses.
This cost is in addition to your normal lifestyle expenses.

### Training

You can spend time between adventures learning a new language or
training with a set of tools. Your GM might allow additional training
options.

First, you must find an instructor willing to teach you. The GM
determines how long it takes, and whether one or more ability checks are
required.

The training lasts for 250 days and costs 1 gp per day. After you spend
the requisite amount of time and money, you learn the new language or
gain proficiency with the new tool.
