# Movement

Swimming across a rushing river, sneaking down a dungeon corridor,
scaling a treacherous mountain slope---all sorts of movement play a key
role in fantasy gaming adventures.

The GM can summarize the adventurers' movement without calculating exact
distances or travel times: "You travel through the forest and find the
dungeon entrance late in the evening of the third day." Even in a
dungeon, particularly a large dungeon or a cave network, the GM can
summarize movement between encounters: "After killing the guardian at
the entrance to the ancient dwarven stronghold, you consult your map,
which leads you through miles of echoing corridors to a chasm bridged by
a narrow stone arch."

Sometimes it's important, though, to know how long it takes to get from
one spot to another, whether the answer is in days, hours, or minutes.
The rules for determining travel time depend on two factors: the speed
and travel pace of the creatures moving and the terrain they're moving
over.

## Speed

Every character and monster has a speed, which is the distance in feet
that the character or monster can walk in 1 round. This number assumes
short bursts of energetic movement in the midst of a life-threatening
situation.

The following rules determine how far a character or monster can move in
a minute, an hour, or a day.

### Travel Pace

While traveling, a group of adventurers can move at a normal, fast, or
slow pace, as shown on the Travel Pace table. The table states how far
the party can move in a period of time and whether the pace has any
effect. A fast pace makes characters less perceptive, while a slow pace
makes it possible to sneak around and to search an area more carefully.

**Forced March.** The Travel Pace table assumes that characters travel
for 8 hours in day. They can push on beyond that limit, at the risk of
`srd:exhaustion`.

For each additional hour of travel beyond 8 hours, the characters cover
the distance shown in the Hour column for their pace, and each character
must make a Constitution saving throw at the end of the hour. The DC is
10 + 1 for each hour past 8 hours. On a failed saving throw, a character
suffers one level of `srd:exhaustion`.

**Mounts and Vehicles.** For short spans of time (up to an hour), many
animals move much faster than humanoids. A mounted character can ride at
a gallop for about an hour, covering twice the usual distance for a fast
pace. If fresh mounts are available every 8 to 10 miles, characters can
cover larger distances at this pace, but this is very rare except in
densely populated areas.

Characters in wagons, carriages, or other land vehicles choose a pace as
normal. Characters in a waterborne vessel are limited to the speed of
the vessel, and they don't suffer penalties for a fast pace or gain
benefits from a slow pace. Depending on the vessel and the size of the
crew, ships might be able to travel for up to 24 hours per day.

Certain special mounts, such as a pegasus or griffon, or special
vehicles, such as a *carpet of flying*, allow you to travel more
swiftly.

### Travel Pace

**Distance Traveled per . . .**

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 15%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 11%" />
<col style="width: 45%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Pace</th>
<th>Minute</th>
<th>Hour</th>
<th>Day</th>
<th>Effect</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fast</td>
<td>400 feet</td>
<td>4 miles</td>
<td>30 miles</td>
<td>−5 penalty to passive Wisdom (Perception) scores</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Normal</td>
<td>300 feet</td>
<td>3 miles</td>
<td>24 miles</td>
<td>---</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Slow</td>
<td>200 feet</td>
<td>2 miles</td>
<td>18 miles</td>
<td>Able to use stealth</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Difficult Terrain

The travel speeds given in the Travel Pace table assume relatively
simple terrain: roads, open plains, or clear dungeon corridors. But
adventurers often face dense forests, deep swamps, rubble-filled ruins,
steep mountains, and ice-covered ground---all considered difficult
terrain.

You move at half speed in difficult terrain---moving 1 foot in difficult
terrain costs 2 feet of speed---so you can cover only half the normal
distance in a minute, an hour, or a day.

## Special Types of Movement

Movement through dangerous dungeons or wilderness areas often involves
more than simply walking. Adventurers might have to climb, crawl, swim,
or jump to get where they need to go.

### Climbing, Swimming, and Crawling

While climbing or swimming, each foot of movement costs 1 extra foot (2
extra feet in difficult terrain), unless a creature has a climbing or
swimming speed. At the GM's option, climbing a slippery vertical surface
or one with few handholds requires a successful Strength (Athletics)
check. Similarly, gaining any distance in rough water might require a
successful Strength (Athletics) check.

### Jumping

Your Strength determines how far you can jump.

**Long Jump.** When you make a long jump, you cover a number of feet up
to your Strength score if you move at least 10 feet on foot immediately
before the jump. When you make a standing long jump, you can leap only
half that distance. Either way, each foot you clear on the jump costs a
foot of movement.

This rule assumes that the height of your jump doesn't matter, such as a
jump across a stream or chasm. At your GM's option, you must succeed on
a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check to clear a low obstacle (no taller
than a quarter of the jump's distance), such as a hedge or low wall.
Otherwise, you hit it.

When you land in difficult terrain, you must succeed on a DC 10
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to land on your feet. Otherwise, you land
`srd:prone`.

**High Jump.** When you make a high jump, you leap into the air a number
of feet equal to 3 + your Strength modifier if you move at least 10 feet
on foot immediately before the jump. When you make a standing high jump,
you can jump only half that distance. Either way, each foot you clear on
the jump costs a foot of movement. In some circumstances, your GM might
allow you to make a Strength (Athletics) check to jump higher than you
normally can.

You can extend your arms half your height above yourself during the
jump. Thus, you can reach above you a distance equal to the height of
the jump plus 1½ times your height.
