# Rest

Heroic though they might be, adventurers can't spend every hour of the
day in the thick of exploration, social interaction, and combat. They
need rest---time to sleep and eat, tend their wounds, refresh their
minds and spirits for spellcasting, and brace themselves for further
adventure.

Adventurers can take short rests in the midst of an adventuring day and
a long rest to end the day.

## Short Rest

A short rest is a period of downtime, at least 1 hour long, during which
a character does nothing more strenuous than eating, drinking, reading,
and tending to wounds.

A character can spend one or more Hit Dice at the end of a short rest,
up to the character's maximum number of Hit Dice, which is equal to the
character's level. For each Hit Die spent in this way, the player rolls
the die and adds the character's Constitution modifier to it. The
character regains hit points equal to the total. The player can decide
to spend an additional Hit Die after each roll. A character regains some
spent Hit Dice upon finishing a long rest, as explained below.

## Long Rest

A long rest is a period of extended downtime, at least 8 hours long,
during which a character sleeps or performs light activity: reading,
talking, eating, or standing watch for no more than 2 hours. If the rest
is interrupted by a period of strenuous activity---at least 1 hour of
walking, fighting, casting spells, or similar adventuring activity---the
characters must begin the rest again to gain any benefit from it.

At the end of a long rest, a character regains all lost hit points. The
character also regains spent Hit Dice, up to a number of dice equal to
half of the character's total number of them (minimum of one die). For
example, if a character has eight Hit Dice, he or she can regain four
spent Hit Dice upon finishing a long rest.

A character can't benefit from more than one long rest in a 24-hour
period, and a character must have at least 1 hit point at the start of
the rest to gain its benefits.
